hi everyone we're gonna do some
statistics today which is kind of
exciting but I brought along a friend of
mine to help me out this is Tom Crawford
from number file you may recognize her
let's not go that far just yeah yeah I
know you're trying to take my place as
the most beloved presenter of
numberphile tell us a little bit about
yourself so I am Tom as James said I
have a channel Tom Rocksmith did a
couple of numberphile videos let's not
say from numberphile just yet and I
teach math at the University of Oxford
which is why you've invited me along
yeah so we're going to do a video about
stats and we've been planning to do this
for ages and then when we were going to
do it we found that professors David
speaker holder already did it with Brian
Cox and it's on the internet and all so
then we thought okay we'll leave it some
time and then we were going to do it
again and then Matt Parker did it with
Hanna Frey
so we'll just do it anyway so we're
going to do it anyway but we're going to
do it with a few more formulas a few
more numbers and we'll put links to the
other videos in the description but we
are gonna be talking about statistics
and Bayesian statistics yeah so what's
Bayesian statistics it sounds fancy yes
so there are generally two approaches to
two statistics so we have classical
statistics which is I want to assign a
probability to an event that's going to
happen in the future right so I want to
think can I make a prediction and then
you have Bayesian statistics which is
where something has happened there's a
fact but we don't know it so it's like
an unknown fact or a gap in our
knowledge and we assign a probability
into the strength of our belief in that
fact so instead of having uncertainty in
the future we have uncertainty in our
own knowledge exactly okay and to
illustrate that we're going to do a
little experiment with this pool table
this is the idea for our experiment so
tom is going to fire this cue ball
around the table and
it's gonna land in some sort of random
position and we're going to assume that
every position is equally likely and
then we're going to try and predict
where it's landed along its length I'm
not going to be looking that's the key
thing so I'm gonna be turning away and
then you're gonna give me some extra
information exactly so just as James
said I'm gonna fire the cue ball really
random every position equally likely
along the length of the tape okay and
you're not looking but then I will give
you information because I will fire 14
other balls around the table again as
random as possible each position equally
likely and I will tell you how many of
these 14 balls lie to the left of the
cue ball and how many lie to the right
and then using that information I am
going to predict where the cue ball land
it sorry try it let's do it let's do it
I've got my cue I've got my cue ball
right I think it's time to go okay we're
going to randomize that cue ball
[Music]
that sounded like a pocket ball okay
I'm not sure I can be more random okay
of the cue ball
we have I'm going to say eight eight on
the left and how many cue balls to the
right I have made a prediction on my
piece of paper
so we've now both got an answer so
you've got the true answer the correct
answer and I've made a prediction so
when we had eight balls to the left and
six to the right I feel like intuitively
a good answer would have been to know
eight fourteenth's along the table but
I've actually gone for a different
answer using Bayesian statistics but Tom
you're going to explain why eight
fourteenth's would be a good answer in
classical statistics so let's say the
length of the table is one okay so zero
two two one
yeah position of the cue ball is going
to be P mm-hm somewhere on this table
someone tape up so if it was a third
right you've got P as a third yeah out
here that means that the probability
that a ball
Ann's to the left it's 1/3 yeah make
sense probabilities the right two-thirds
yeah so P and 1 minus P okay so
probability of being 2 left is P
probability of been to the right 1 minus
P but we had 8 balls to the left 8 balls
to the left so independent events for
each ball means P multiplied by itself
8 times P to the 8th to the right 6
balls 1 minus P to power 6 we both knew
what was going but the number of
different ways of positioning 14 items
14 to date so all the different
arrangements which is the whole
factorial thing is some the factorial
thing yeah so
that is our probability that's the
probability of the data probability of
getting 8 to the left 6 to the right
exactly
now if we plot this as a graph we can
see there's a peak
yeah center of the graph and so that
peak is when the data is most likely
exactly so the value that makes it most
likely for us to have a to the left to
the right the value for P is going to be
8 14th fantastic so it's a quaintest
approach so that means so the idea is if
you did this experiment a million times
then most often the most frequent result
will be 8 to the left since right if P
is what we think it is if the true value
is 8 16 14 or T's 8 14 yes so if you had
like a million parallel universes then
most of them would have 8 to the left
and we're just assuming we're in the
most frequent universe exactly that is
the frequentist approach to statistics
and that's where 8 14 is comes from so
the problem with that method is it's not
actually calculating the probability of
the position itself it's calculating the
probability of the data and it's kind of
inferring what the position 4 should be
it's kind of the position that maximizes
the probability of the data what I want
to do is actually calculate the
probability of the position itself now
before we did the experiment
I just thought every position must be
equally likely now once I've got
information that might change I might
decide that some positions have become
more likely than they were before
now to do that calculation are usually
called conditional probability which is
looking at the probability of position
after getting the data but at the moment
I don't know how to calculate that we're
going to use something called Bayes law
so some of you may have seen Bayes law
before if you look it up in the
textbooks it looks like this and the
idea goes back to Thomas Bayes not not
just not just mr. BAE's not just Thomas
Bayes oh yeah
all the mathematicians who were involved
with the the theory as well Richard
price and Laplace so now let me show you
how I use Bayes law to calculate the
probability of position using the data
that you gave me so if you look at Bayes
law it's now going to look like this and
actually we've worked out a lot of this
the probability of the data is spot Tom
already worked out we've got that we
just pull that into the formula you're
welcome yes thank you very much the
probability of position well before we
had the information we were just
assuming every position was equally
likely now to make it simple let's just
say will divide the table up into 100
strips so we've got little thin strips
so we're going to have like 101 possible
positions and then we're going to say
those are equally likely and then the
only thing left to work out is the
probability of having 8 balls to the
left and then you just work it out for
each position and then you just add it
all up and it's kind of tedious I've
already done it and if you do the whole
thing that whole constant term turns out
to be 446 not to rain on your parade
James but did we need the constant no so
I've done more work than was necessary
there because what you can do and it's
nice this I really do like this we could
just ignore the constant term altogether
so we can just say it's proportional to
this and then well the sum of the
probabilities at the end have to add up
to 1 so we just rescale everything at
the end of the calculations so now we've
got a probability for each position and
we can plot that on a graph we get this
curve and so instead now of just
maximizing the probability of the
outcome and assuming we're in the most
frequent universe what I did
guilty we can use though all those
probabilities to work out the average
position to work out the average
position you just take the probability
of each position multiplied by the
position that's the formula for an
average or position so let's stick the
numbers in that we've got and I've got
an average of naught point
five six two five one two there is no
way order you did that in your head now
I'm reading it off that piece of paper
right now I'm afraid I do have one of
the slight issue with your calculation
Davis with my otherwise perfect
calculation I have seen no problem
whatsoever it was otherwise perfect but
I'm just wondering why you picked a
hundred slices for the pool table yeah
okay so you didn't have to be a hundred
slices the idea is we wanted to take
thin slices and then hopefully we get a
reasonably accurate answer my answer was
still kind of an approximation because
in reality position is continuous but if
you imagine taking instead of a hundred
slices to more and more thinner slices
this would tend to a continuous line if
you do that you actually get a curve
that looks like this it's called the
beta distribution and we can use the
beta distribution to work out the
average position there is in fact a
formula for this and the formula looks
like this so this is the formula for
average position and it means here if
you have L L for left balls and R for
right balls then the average position
will be L plus 1 divided by L plus R
plus 2 this is the formula you get using
the beta distribution for the average
position and I'm guessing this is the
one you used this is the formula that I
used for my prediction let's let's check
it so you see this right okay so I've
got my prediction here are you nervous
I'm nervous I don't know okay so let's
just emphasize I don't know what the
true answer is and you've got the true
answer and I haven't seen it I've got
the Bayesian predicted answer I'm really
nervous so we see how they compare okay
what's how you feel first well I 3 2 1
okay 3 2 1 all right 3 2 OH
now I'm not too sure about that I've got
0.56 25 reality 0.70 don't know I don't
feel that too close so statistics is a
lie it's something however however yes
second bombshell okay's and gentlemen I
have my other calculation from the
frequentist right so this would have
been the answer in a most frequent
universe in the most frequent universe
instead of an average universe we would
have expected never be a higher so I
think it's closer isn't it
frequentists frequentists are a little
bit closer the frequencies and the
average has beaten Bayesian oh no it's
all a disaster
Bayesian statistics is alive why did we
make this video
no we can't end like that can we James
this is your chance to defend your
Bayesian companies okay so I am gonna
defend Bayesian statistics there in a
couple of ways for a start if we wanted
to do more data if you want to add more
balls and get more results then one nice
thing about Bayesian statistics is I
don't have to start again from scratch
so before I assumed that every position
was equally likely because I had no
information now that I've got some
information I can actually use that
probability as my starting point and
then add extra information to it my
results are gonna get more accurate the
other thing that's good about Bayesian
statistics is we do get a full range of
probabilities for all the positions and
we can use those probabilities for the
positions in many kinds of calculations
not just working out the average
position other calculations as well
where we need the full range of
probabilities for every position there
then it defended I'm sorry I don't know
I'm not even sorry to say I'm gonna say
based on our experiment I am I am a
frequentist and that's a Bayesian
argument
[Music]